HANDY Release 0.7.10

23 March 1989  
Confidential and Proprietary

This document describes the V0.7.10 release of the Handy development environment. It includes these sections:

- [HandyASM V0.09](#handyasm-v009)
- [Handebug 1.51](#handebug-v151)
- [New Print utility](#new-print-utility)
- [Handy Games Names reminder](#handy-games-names-reminder)
- [What you must do to start using this release](#what-you-must-do-to-start-using-this-release)

## HandyASM V0.09

New release of *HandyASM*, with many new features and several bug fixes.

Local labels are no longer delimited by the `.EQU` and `.=` (aka `.SET`) directives.

The old assembler's manual states that `#commands` weren't allowed to start in column zero, a rule that *HandyASM* was designed to follow. But several of you started your `#commands` in column zero anyway, and then claimed this to be a *HandyASM* bug. Not a bug, you goofballs. Rather, *HandyASM* has been enhanced to allow `#commands` to start in column zero.

OK, so now the `.RUN` argument can be a symbolic forward reference, so forget everything I said in the last release notes about the ways to rearrange your `.RUN`'s. Note, however, that if you have multiple instances of `.RUN` (if you're debugging and you slap one in temporarily) and any of them uses symbolic forward referencing, it will be difficult to control which `.RUN` will appear last in the output file.

The `.TF` (aka `.TFILE`) directive has been implemented. The directive allows you to specify a new target file for the output of your binary, which is exactly what we need to build ROM images. I'm not sure to what level symbol referencing over `.TF` boundaries has been implemented, but I'm pretty sure it will do what we want. Some experimentation is called for.

The size of the expression heap is doubled, which should solve some of the `gurus` that we were seeing. But this is just a temporary fix. The real fix will involve dynamic heap resizing.

The `-`D command-line switch is now supported.

Hey, we get a bonus command-line switch. The `-l` switch will continue to mean "define include path." The `-E` switch now provides the feature provided by `+I` in the old assembler, namely that the switch will cause symbols created using `.EQU` to be included in the symbol file.

When an error is encountered, a `.bin` file isn't created.

Bug fixes:

- Error numbers are returned correctly, I think. Someone should test that this now does what it's supposed to do.
- Macros handle labels correctly.
- Errors and symbols appear in the listings.
- References to addresses in the range `$FF00` through `$FFFF` are no longer identified as negative values that need to be truncated to single-byte values.
- Listing lines that needed to be truncated no longer create listings junk.
- Output files generated by the assembler are written into your current directory, not into the directory that contains the source.

This version is almost ready to be used. Get me your bug reports fast and maybe by tomorrow moming we can switch over!

Finally, a new version of *CmpBin* is being released. This one generates much less output, unless you specify the command-line switch `+v` in which case you'll get normal verbose output.

## Handebug V1.51

The current text string in the `BootStrap` requester are now saved when you save your settings.

Bug fix:

- When you're display a symbolic disassembly and you edit a memory location that immediately follows a label, you no longer get multiple copies of the label for each nybble that you type.

## New Print utility

I've installed a new print utility on the boot disk of the Amiga next to our printer. It's called `pr` and it prints bordered pages with page numbers and stuff. You invoke it from the CLI, specifying the name of the file or files that you want printed. The program also allows wild-cards. Enter `pr` with `nop` argument to see the options.

## Handy Games Names reminder

You have only until the end of tomorrow to make your Handy Games Names submissions.

## What you must do to start using this release

If you want to assemble using the new assembler, first enter the CLI command `NewAsm`. When you want to go back to the old assembler, enter `OldAsm`.
