# HANDY Release 0.7.6

5 March 1989  
Confidential and Proprietary

This document describes the V0.7.6 release of the Handy development environment. It includes these sections:

- [Project summary reminder](#project-summary-reminder)
- [Handycraft V1.51](#handycraft-v151)
- [Miscellaneous](#miscellaneous)
- [What you must do to start using this release](#what-you-must-do-to-start-using-this-release)

## Project summary reminder

Just to remind you, everyone is supposed to submit a summary of and time projection for the components and details of your game that still need completing.

## Handycraft V1.51

Introducing a new verb:

> **james** vb. [FR: *jamer* to jam lots of stuff into a little space; also Australian: *jammie* derivation of pyjama] 1. to cause a large amount of data to occupy a small amount of space in a short amount of time, as in *When I james my imagery it finally fits in the ROM!* 2. to cause semantic misunderstanding or analogic confusion, as in *When I first asked him how the algorithm worked, he jamesed me until I didn't want to know anymore*. jamesment n. jamesify v. jamesic adj. jamesacious adv. Also slang jammie n. 1. Data that has been jamesed, as in *I'm confused, I put the jammies on Suzy but Mikey went to sleep?*

*Handycraft* now allows you to james your sprite imagery, resulting in maximally compressed data (no fooling, it won't get any more compressed than this unless there's a bug in the program). All of the code was written in C, and then most of it was rewritten in assembler, so that jamesing data using the `I` command now takes about 0.45 seconds per line on a 100-pixel line of average complexity. There is no longer shallow/deep compression, only james compression. Since james compression beats even deep compression, you might want to recompress all of your sprite imagery.

If you james your imagery, you may want to hang this release's stylish "I JAMESIFY" poster. If enough of you choose to make alterations to the poster which express your feelings about having to compress all your imagery one more time, then we just might have a contest to decide who has the most entertaining poster. Winner gets a pizza, don'cha know.

Congratulations and thanks to James Donald for the algorithm, which is quite powerful indeed. Also, for wrestling with an attempt to translate James' algorithm into English, a half-Nelson of thanks to Scott.

Coming soon:

- Doing `TRIM EDGES` correctly, including not wasting a bit-per-pixel on zero when all zeroes will be trimmed
- Highlight currently selected `Data Pixel` array selection
- Loading *Handycraft* palette from a sprite's brush
- Option for `W` command (write all sprites) to write all sprites to one file

## Miscellaneous

When using *HPRINT*, you aren't restricted to creating a buffer that's only one line tall. You buffer can be as many lines tall as you like. Just remember that when printing a line of text you pass the *HPRINT* macro the address of the literal data buffer line's offset-to-next byte and all will be fine.

Several of you have gone back to poke around with sound files generated by the sound guys using *HSFX* editor. If you do, you'll note that the text file generated by the *HSFX* editor has a bunch of extraneous junk at the top of the file. You are free (and, in fact, encouraged) to strip all that stuff off. Soon the *HSFX* editor won't inconvenience you in this way anymore.

## What you must do to start using this release

Zip.
